	$Id: INSTRUCTIONS,v 1.5 2008/06/24 16:57:07 efalk Exp $

Overview:

  The falkdome programs do not have a sophisticated user interface.  Many
  functions depend on other functions being executed in the correct
  sequence.


Commands:

    Some commands are given by keystroke, others via a menu attached to
    the right mouse button.  The left button performs an action depending
    on the current mode (initial mode is rotation).  The middle button
    always rotates.

    Additionally, some windowing systems mandate a toolbar menu be
    present. Because falkdome makes no use of this feature, a default
    is provided by the GLUT system, which is of little use beyond
    saving a screenshot in tiff format.

    Keyboard commands:

      esc	exit
      z, Z	rotate about Z axis
      r		reset rotations
      R		toggle rotation animation
      a, A	increase (decrease) rotation speed
      v		toggle vertex view
      e		toggle edge view
      f		toggle face view
      c		display coordinates as red, green, blue spheres
      2 - 9	tesselate the dome by the specified factor
      n		normalize the dome -- that is, convert to a sphere
      N		normalize, without the cute animation
      l		level the bottom of the dome


    Right-click mouse-activated menu commands:

      Faces		toggle face view
      Edges		toggle edge view
      Vertices		toggle vertex view
      Normalize		normalize the dome
      Rotate		switch to rotate mode -- left mouse rotates the dome
      Delete Elements	delete mode -- left mouse deletes elements
      Delete Bottom Row	delete bottom row of the dome
      Raise Vertex	select a vertex and raise it up and down
      Extend Vertex	select a vertex and move it horizontally
      Extend Vertex rad	select a vertex and move it relative to dome center
      Normalize Vertex	select a vertex and return it to the sphere
      Level Bottom	level the bottom of the dome
      Raise Dome	raise dome above ground level
      Save		write dome to "dome.data"
      Read		read dome from "dome.data"



How to use the software:

  Linux users:

    The falkdome, falkstruts, and so forth commands should be in your
    path, so it's sufficient to just type e.g. 'falkdome -radius 15'
    to run the program.

  Mac users:

    The interface is a little deceptive.  You can't just double-click on the
    icons to run the programs, because the programs want arguments on the
    command line. If you've

      % sudo make install

    you should have the programs in /usr/local/bin and if you've got that
    directory in your $PATH search variable you should be good to go.
    Bring up a terminal.app window and issue commands there, like:

      % falkdome -radius 15

  Dome:

    Use "falkdome --help" for options.

    . General:  you should periodically select "Save" to save your
      work, then rename "dome.data" to another name to save it.

    . General:  The middle mouse button (and the left mouse button in
      rotate mode) allows you to change the view at any time.


   0) (Optional) Start off by visiting the Desert Domes geodesic dome
      calculator; it's an easy way to experiment with dome sizes and
      strut lengths.  Play with the calculator in order to choose your
      dome size and tesselation frequency.

	http://www.desertdomes.com/domecalc.html

   1) Run dome with the -radius option to create the initial icosahedron

   2) Press a number key corresponding to your desired tesselation
      frequency, 3 or 4 is a good value for most domes.

   3) Select "Normalize" to normalize the icosahedron into a sphere

   4) Select "Delete Bottom Row" as desired to remove excess rows.

   5) Use "Raise Vertex", "Extend Vertex" and "Extend Vertex radial"
      to reshape the dome to your preferences.  Use "Normalize vertex"
      to reset any given vertex to a sphere.  In each of these modes,
      select a vertex and then use the mouse to move it.

   6) Use "Level bottom" to give the dome a nice level bottom edge.

   7) Use "Save" to save your work to "dome.data"

   8) Use escape key to exit the program

   9) Rename dome.data to a more permanent name.

  10) You can come back and edit your dome some more at any time by
      giving the command "dome <domefilename>"

  11) (Optional)  The "Raise Dome" function will adjust a dome's
      coordinates to place them all above ground level.  This is
      very useful when generating 3D studio files, but has no effect
      on strut lists and layout diagrams.




  Strut list:

    Use the falkstruts program to generate a cutting and bending list
    for the struts.

    "falkstruts --help" for arguments.

    When struts are made out of metal pipe, their ends are flattened,
    bent, and bolt holes are drilled in the ends.  See the photo bend.jpg,
    included in the documentation for an explanation.

    Struts are grouped together based on length and bend angles.


    The arguments used by falkstruts are as follows:

	margin	The length of pipe that extends beyond the bolt hole.

	bl	Bend Length -- the amount of pipe between the
		bend point and the bolt hole.

	lt	Length Tolerance.  Maximum differences in length of
		struts within a group (default is .1%)

	at	Angle Tolerance.  Maximum difference in bend angles of
		struts within a group (default is 2°).

    	in	Multiply all lengths by 12, converting feet to inches

	scale x	Multiply all lengths by x


    The output generated by falkstruts is as follows:

	strut name:	all identical struts are collected together
			and given a common name.

	count:		Number of struts of this size

	length:		Edge length, vertex-to-vertex of this strut

	a0, a1:		The angle which the ends of the strut are bent
			inwards.  A negative angle indicates an end
			which is bent outwards, i.e. in the case of a
			strut which extends out of the dome.

	length2:	Bending the end of a strut shortens the
			strut slightly.  Length2 is the distance
			between bolt holes prior to bending.

			(More information can be found at
			http://www.colorado-research.com/~gourlay/dome/)

	cut length:	Finally, cut length is the total length of the
			pipe, including end margins.




  Assembly diagram:

    Use the falklayout program to generate an assembly diagram.  This
    program generates a postscript file.

    "falklayout --help" for options.

    On colors:

      By default, the layout diagram is in black and white.  The -color
      option generates a layout diagram in color.  The default colors are
      red, green, blue, yellow, orange, magenta, cyan, black, and brown.

      If you have a limited supply of paint, you can specify your own
      colors to use, e.g.:

	falklayout -color -colors red,green,yellow dome.data dome.ps

      (If you want to use a color not in the list above, edit utils.c and
      modify the colordefs[] and defcolors[] arrays to suit.  Please send
      me a copy of your changes so I can incorporate them into the software.
      Or, if modifying C source code isn't your bag, send me email and I'll
      modify it for you.)



  Cover diagram:

    Use the falkcover program to generate a diagram for a custom-fitted
    cover for your dome.  The program allows for the diameters of the
    pipes but does not allow for shrinkage of canvas.  It's best to
    pre-shrink the material before cutting if applicable.

    The program also does not include seam allowances or make any attempt
    to decide for you how to cut the panels.

    The program assumes the fabric has a right side and a wrong side.  Thus,
    you will often find panels which are mirror images of each other.

    The program does not take the grain of the fabric into account.

    "falkcover --help" for options.

    Reading the diagram:

      If you have a color printer, you should take advantage of the -color
      option to get a more readable output.

      The first page of the output file is an overall view of the dome cover.
      You can use this to help decide how to cut panels from your canvas.  You
      might want to print extra copies of this page and literally cut them up
      with scissors.

      Each panel is shown with a panel name in the center, and edge names in
      small print near the edges.  The edge names should match those generated
      by falkstruts.

      Next, is a list of all the different panel sizes along with the lengths
      of their edges.

      Following the printed list are diagrams of the individual panels.



  3DStudio files:

    The falk3ds program reads a dome data file and generates a 3D
    Studio model file.  Lights and cameras may optionally be added.

    "falk3ds --help" for options.





Data File Format:

  The dome data file format is quite simple.

  The first line lists the radius of the dome.

  After that, the first section is the vertex list, with the +Z direction
  being "up"

  The second section is the edge list.  Each entry consists of indices
  into the vertex list, the length, and the name of the edge if it's
  been assigned.

  The third section lists the dome faces.  Each entry consists of
  three vertex indices.
